---
layout: post
title: "Core Area 2: Learning, Teaching and Assessment"
author: "Eric Martin"
date: 2025-07-29
categories: documentation
image: radio_education.jpg
image_credit: "Image courtesy of: Getty Images"
---
<p style="font-size: 1.75em; font-weight: bold; text-align: center;">
<em>“The role of the teacher is to create the conditions for invention rather than provide ready-made knowledge.”</em>
</p>

<p style="text-align: right; font-size: 1.25em;">
<em>— Seymour Papert</em>
</p>



* <a href="#Core_Area_2a">Jump to Core Area 2a: Teaching Experience and Curriculum Development</a>
* <a href="#Core_Area_2b">Jump to Core Area 2b: Understanding my Target Learners</a>






## Preface


The following section outlines my university-level teaching experience, developed across academic posts in both Canada and the UK. This includes my current role as Lecturer and MSc Programme Leader in Civil Engineering at University of Greenwich (2022-present), previous experience as a Teaching Fellow at University of Birmingham (2021-2022), and earlier experience as a Term Adjunct Lecturer at Queen’s University at Kingston (2017-2019). I have taught at both undergraduate and postgraduate levels, led curriculum redevelopment, and supervised MSc research in the UK. These experiences have reinforced the importance of structured, context-rich teaching that supports technical learning and the  adoption of technology, as well as decision making, communication, and interdisciplinary engagement within engineering education



<h2 id="Core_Area_2a"></h2>


## Core Area 2a: Teaching Experience and Curriculum Development

At Queen’s, large lectures in civil engineering drew from outdated templates and static PDFs. With limited digital infrastructure and no institutional push toward TEL integration, I relied heavily on smartboard logic and partial note handouts. Students responded strongly to this low-tech approach, not because it was novel, but because it created space for pacing, reasoning, and co-construction of knowledge. This reinforced for me that clarity and structure matter more than polish, particularly in high-cognitive-load topics like hydrology, contaminant transport, numerical methods and fluid mechanics.

At Birmingham, the shift to hybrid delivery follwoing the pandemic prompted a deeper engagement with online tools. I implemented Panopto lecture capture, but resisted overuse of polling tools, having seen engagement fatigue surface early. In one module, I redesigned the assessment brief to simulate a real-world technical report with constraints drawn from client briefs which integrate both civil engineering judgement and communication clarity. Feedback from students highlighted how much they valued authenticity and pacing over digital flair.

***Core Area 2a Case i: Current Role and Technolgical Integration***

In my current role I lead MSc Water, Waste & Environmental Engineering programme and I have  have redeveloped and led two Level-7 modules in the Civil Engineering programme: Contaminant Hydrogeology and Remediation (ENVI1195) and Hydrosystems Engineering and Management (CIVI1135).  I have also co-taught BEng modules including Introduction to Solid and Fluid Mechanics (GEEN1193) and Environment and Earth Materials (CIVI1158). Additionally, I have supervised MSc dissertation projects within the programme, which have uniquely focused on data driven engineering analyses using the tools most appropriate to both objectives and student capabilities.

My teaching approach now balances scaffolded interactivity with cognitive stretch. My use of technology in teaching is thoughfully applied to focus the students on the interacations occuring in the classroom, or to extend their abilities to facilitate applied problem solving.  When tools like Mentimeter and Moodle quizzes are used, they serve as entry points. More often, I use partial notes, interactive applets, and structured smartboard walkthroughs to build conceptual fluency. This hybrid method is grounded in constructivist pedagogy, but also shaped by my learners’ realities: varied levels of digital fluency, uneven preparedness, and often, especially in engineering contexts, a desire for practical relevance over abstraction.

The feedback for this method has been highly positive, as my line manager and Dupty Head of School reported that:

> -(Evidence 1) "Eric has received excellent student evaluations in two of his modules that he leads..."He has demonstrated a strong commitment to teaching excellence. His module shells have been completed to a high standard."

While students have provided encouraging feedback on my technologically integrated appraoch as well:

> -(Evidence 2) The real-time data on the hydraulics of Prof. is perfect

> -(Evidence 3) "Loved the teaching methodology of Dr Eric Martin will hope to learn more from him in future and work under his supervision to deepen and enhance my knowledge."

> -(Evidence 4) "The Lecturer consistently fosters an inclusive environment and goes above and beyond to ensure we have a strong understanding of the module."

> -(Evidence 5) "Dr Eric Martin has been a fantastic lecturer this term. It is a shame he will only be leading part of the course."

And with respect to an assignment that required MSc students to develop an analytica stochastic model for contaminant transport (ENVI-1195)

> -(Evidence 6) "The model fosters critical thinking, and the examples the professor provides helped bridge the gap between what I’m reading and what to expect in industry"

My aim is to reflect the evolving demands and technical capabilites of engineering education, shaped by both my background in civil and environmental engineering and my earlier academic grounding in literature and narrative. I often structure lectures using frame narratives: Embedding technical material within a contextual arc, a real-world scenario, or a slowly unfolding problem. This approach has proven especially effective in environmental engineering and hydrogeology, where systems are non-linear, consequences are distributed across time and space, and student intuition often needs scaffolding to grapple with delayed causality or layered complexity.

***Core Area 2a Case ii: End-Point Assessor, Digital and Technology Solutions, BSc Hons (Degree Apprenticeship), Ford Pro***

In addition to the modules I lead, I contribute to our school’s delivery of the <a href="https://www.gre.ac.uk/undergraduate-courses/engsci/digital_technology_solutions_bsc_hons_degree_apprenticeship" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"> Digital and Technology Solutions, BSc Hons (Degree Apprenticeship)</a> as an End-Point Assessor. The programme, accredited by Tech Industry Gold, combines academic study with workplace-based learning and is tailored to meet the evolving demands of the digital sector.

My recent assessment work focused on learners from Ford Pro, whose digital teams develop technology tools for managing commercial vehicle fleets. Projects included frontend development of dashboards relaying API-fed lead and sales data to regional representatives, as well as backend systems focused on regression testing and network integrity. These applied solutions aligned surprisingly well with my own teaching experiences in modelling and data interpretation, though the professional contexts were markedly different.

What struck me most was the shared objective: whether in environmental engineering or fleet analytics, the core challenge remains how to increase engagement and deliver information meaningfully within complex systems. I provided feedback on code logic, system architecture, remote presentation skills, and the structure of technical slide decks. I also encouraged learners to reflect on future extensions of their work, particularly around deployment, automation, and user interaction.

This experience reinforces the value of authentic, outcome-based assessment in professional education. It has informed my broader teaching by highlighting how technical competence, communication, and applied reasoning converge in real-world settings.

***Core Area 2a Case ii Evidence***

<a href="/assets/img/DTSAssessorProof.png" target="_blank" style="text-decoration: underline; color: #004080;">-(Evidence 7) Email Related to the Digital and Technology Solutions, BSc Hons Degree Apprenticeship</a>

***Core Area 2a Reflections***

When I started teaching as a graduate student, there weren’t many tools. I began with pacing and with whiteboards and felt tips that ran out mid-equation. That was a good thing, I think. I’m fortunate to remember what it’s like to hold a room without help, with only a stick of chalk to protect myself with from the anticipting eyes. Later, when I began leading modules, technology in the classroom was accelerating, but I already had developed a style. I bent the tools to fit it, not the other way around. In lectures, I use well-designed, annotated visuals to pull the class into the material and to provide context, to show why it matters. Lecture recordings and walkthroughs help students who can’t attend in person, and assignment briefs, datasets, and practicum tasks are always available. Interactive tools like the Jupyter notebooks discussed in Core Area 1 have deepened my ability to model real-world behaviours. They give students not just a formula, but a sense of why it behaves that way, and how that behaviour plays out in realistic scenarios.

I am a student of technology. As it evolves, we all are. I’ve learned how to use new tools as they emerge, and I’ve tried to keep my focus on what they’re for, rather than what they seem to offer. One of the risks I’ve come to recognise is the slide into passive delivery. I think about how radio didn’t start out as a broadcast medium; in its early days, it was only HAM radio operators: conversational, participatory, even chaotic (Blake, 1926; ARRL, 2024). As Douglas (1999) observes, early radio created a sense of direct connection. Listeners felt as though the medium was speaking just to them. That intimacy was real, but it became one-directional, much like Television. The same observatrion can be made with regard to the early internet. Web 1.0 was exploratory, decentralised and something you wandered through, but it eventually gave way to social media platforms, which are laregely passive, with intermittant bursts of minimal engagement, measured in scrolls and clicks, which has been written about extensively by van Dijck (2013) and Srnicek (2017). In my teaching, I want it to resemble HAM radio, or a BBS server, at least on an emotional level, and I have used all the tools in my power to advance that goal.   Based on the student feedback, using tehcnological tools to comlpliment design appears to be successful. I'm acutely aware that tools alone don’t build engagement. That still requires structure, attention, and shared focus, something I try to cultivate using every tool available, not to distract from the subject, but to bond over.

The perspective of being a perpetual student of technology permeated my role as End Point Assessor for the Digital Technology Solutions degree apprenticeship. I  genuinely enjoyed it. These were professionals working on API-fed dashboards to track sales leads, or back-end regression testing to reduce lag and data loss, which are serious issues in their business context. What struck me was how closely their aims mirrored what I try to teach: clarity, responsiveness, and meaningful communication through code. Watching them work, I saw familiar principles applied in unfamiliar ways. It was refreshing to step outside the academic frame and see those ideas play out in a different register, whihch was less about physics informed models and more about consequences. I felt bonded to these young engineers and their mentors, not through the tools themselves, but through the problems they were trying to solve. That’s what I try to cultivate in my own teaching as well: not distraction from the subject, but connection around it.

***Core Area 2a References***

* ARRL (2024) ‘A Brief History of Amateur Radio’, American Radio Relay League. Available at: https://www.arrl.org/ham-radio-history
* Blake, G.G. (1926) History of Radio Telegraphy and Telephony. London: Chapman and Hall.
* Douglas, S.J. (1999) Listening In: Radio and the American Imagination. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
* Srnicek, N. (2017) Platform Capitalism. Cambridge: Polity Press.
* van Dijck, J. (2013) The Culture of Connectivity: A Critical History of Social Media. Oxford: Oxford University Press



<h2 id="Core_Area_2b"></h2>

## Core Area 2b: Understanding my Target Learners

***Core Area 2b Case i: The Simplicity of a Smartboard***

Understanding my students is central to developing a sense of connection with them. I’ve been in their shoes, and I know what they will need to understand by graduation and what it takes to reach that point. As a PhD candidate, I watched my mentor begin each lecture with handwritten skeletons of ideas: Headings on acetate. Students were given photocopies of those acetates, filled only with headings. The rest unfolded as he lectured, pacing slowly and pausing often to address emerging questions. He advised me, “There’s value in putting pen to paper,” and “People remember what they write in their own hand. They ask questions the moment they stop following. If they have full notes in front of them, they disengage at the first inevitable roadblock, lulled by a false sense of security.”

That technique stayed with me. In my own practice, I’ve adapted it to current tools. I now use a hybrid structure that blends tablets or smartboards, partial notes, and deliberate pacing. Lectures are built around joint construction: Students follow and contribute to the evolving content rather than passively observing. This structure is enhanced by digital affordances: diagrams, videos, Jupyter notebooks, or GIS viewers can be launched mid-stream. Moodle provides reading access in advance, and full lecture notes and recordings are posted afterwards, extending accessibility for all learners. The lecture becomes an event, something experienced in real time but supported before and after by well-curated material.

One student wrote:

> -(Evidence 1) “...somehow feels exactly how my brain wants to receive it.”

That response aligns with my goal: to design sessions that combine cognitive stretch with real-time support.

Student responses to this approach have been consistent:

My teaching responds to this generational shift. I don’t aim to outrun distraction but rather to out-structure it. That framing, I think, is part of why the approach resonates. The students have responded well:

> -(Evidence 2) "I have found the fluids presentations well constructed and interesting - the lecturer has obviously made a lot of effort to make the subject interesting and even fun. I also liked the fluids tutorial questions which were pitched at the right level for me."

> -(Evidence 3) "One of the lecturers actually gave us worksheets to work through in the tutorial which helped with the understanding and went around to each person answering questions and checking the work"

The class was redeveloped to be more demanding, conceptually richer and technically deeper. Objectivley more diffuclt. Performance in the class, however, did not suffer. Students completed more advanced material without any drop in average scores. The change was not in the difficulty of content, but in the scaffolding and pacing of its delivery.

***Core Area 2b Case i Evidence***

<a href="/assets/img/Lecture_Skeleton.png" target="_blank" style="text-decoration: underline; color: #004080;">-(Evidence 4) Representative example of tablet usage for course delivery using a lecture skeelton</a>


***Core Area 2b Case i Reflections***

What I have learned from this work is that attention is not something we can take for granted in the modern classroom. My students have grown up in a digital environment saturated with short-form media. They arrive trained in swipe logic. Most have never known a world without screens, and many have internalised the platform economy’s demand for instant reward. This isn’t a moral failing but very much an environmental condition. I see my role as helping them unlearn some of that conditioning, not through restriction, but through structure.

I draw on the findings of Mueller and Oppenheimer (2014) and Van der Meer & Van der Weel (2017), whose work confirms the cognitive advantages of handwritten note-taking. But I also remain conscious of how contemporary tools can complement this rather than undermine it. I don’t resist technology; I use it to slow students down. I integrate platforms not to distract, but to direct and to anchor attention, to pace information, and to reintroduce difficulty in a supported way.

Cognitive science literature supports this strategy. Firth et al. (2019) link sustained digital engagement with diminished working memory and increased task-switching cost. Chiossi et al. (2023) show that TikTok-style feeds interfere with memory and task intention. Drody (2025) argues that pacing, task value, and structured delivery can help recondition fractured attention. These studies affirm what I’ve observed: my best teaching outcomes come when I build time into lectures for struggle, recalibration, and shared recovery.

My aim is not to entertain students or to match the velocity of their apps. It is to reclaim their attention, and to act as a guide through oftentimes, complex course material that requires sustained attention to understand and internalise. The positive feedback I’ve received suggests that this slower, more structured approach resonates. The goal is not to mimic platforms, but to offer an alternative: a space where difficulty is normal, recovery is possible, and learning feels like thinking

***Core Area 2b Case i References***

* Firth, J., Torous, J., Stubbs, B., Firth, J.A., Steiner, G.Z., Smith, L., Alvarez‐Jimenez, M., Gleeson, J., Vancampfort, D., Armitage, C.J. and Sarris, J., 2019. The “online brain”: how the Internet may be changing our cognition. World psychiatry, 18(2), pp.119-129.
* Rioja, K., Cekic, S., Bavelier, D. and Baumgartner, S., 2023. Unravelling the link between media multitasking and attention across three samples. Technology, mind, and behavior, 4(2), p.tmb0000106.
* Drody, A.C., Pereira, E.J., Danckert, J. and Smilek, D., 2025. Inattention over time-on-task: the role of motivation in mitigating temporal increases in media multitasking. Frontiers in Cognition, 4, p.1547295.
* Chiossi, F., Haliburton, L., Ou, C., Butz, A.M. and Schmidt, A., 2023, April. Short-form videos degrade our capacity to retain intentions: Effect of context switching on prospective memory. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 1-15).
* Haliti-Sylaj, T. and Sadiku, A., 2024. Impact of Short Reels on Attention Span and Academic Performance of Undergraduate Students. Eurasian Journal of Applied Linguistics, 10(3), pp.60-68.



***Core Area 2b Case ii: Deep Gamification***

I use large-scale roleplay as a pedagogical framework, structuring assignments around realistic engineering tasks rather than isolated quizzes or polls. Students work in defined roles such as consulting engineers, regulators, or site assessors and complete sequences of applied tasks that reflect real-world conditions.

These assignments use publicly available datasets and domain-specific tools: GIS platforms, Google Earth overlays, the BGS Geology Viewer, the BGS Wellbore Repository, and groundwater data from <a href="https://giovanni.gsfc.nasa.gov/giovanni/" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">  NASA’s GRACE data via the Giovanni portal</a> and the <a href="https://urs.earthdata.nasa.gov" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"> Earthdata API</a>. Tutorials guide students through tasks such as risk assessment, data interpretation, intervention planning, and professional reporting. Each stage builds on the last, simulating the workflow of practicing engineers.

This method supports both engagement and transferability, grounding abstract concepts in applied decision-making scenarios. Students commented: 

> -(Evidence 1) "The tutorial after each lecturer really helps to understand what is the purpose of what is being taught"

> -(Evidence 2) The professor (even though new to the university) brings in his experiences in the field while teaching. This helped me know the real
life applications and scenarios.

> -(Evidence 3) "The model fosters critical thinking, and the examples the professor provides helped bridge the gap between what I’m reading and what to expect in industry"

That purpose, for me, is always clarity through narrative, supported by tools that deepen rather than distract.Tutorials were structured as a progressive sequence of engineering tasks, guiding students through applied problem-solving using the tools introduced in each session. The aim was to help students picture themselves working as engineers—not just learning the material, but applying it.

***Core Area 2b Case ii Evidence***


<a href="/assets/img/Roleplay_Tutorial.pdf" target="_blank" style="text-decoration: underline; color: #004080;">-(Evidence 4) Representative Roleplay Practium Integrating Standard Working Technology</a>

<a href="https://geologyviewer.bgs.ac.uk/?_ga=2.21190907.1951373977.1753865229-1111601842.1753865229" 
   target="_blank" 
   rel="noopener" 
   style="text-decoration: underline; color: #004080;">
-(Evidence 5) Practical Technology Tool: BGS Geology Viewer
</a>



<a href="https://mapapps2.bgs.ac.uk/geoindex/home.html?layer=BGSBoreholes&_ga=2.51818729.1998518100.1752680717-802570605.1752680717" 
   target="_blank" 
   rel="noopener" 
   style="text-decoration: underline; color: #004080;">
-(Evidence 6) Practical Technology Tool: BGS Borehole Viewer
</a>

<a href="https://www.ukso.org/" 
   target="_blank" 
   rel="noopener" 
   style="text-decoration: underline; color: #004080;">
-(Evidence 7) Practical Technology Tool: UK Soil Observatory
</a>


***Core Area 2b Case ii Reflections***

A growing body of literature warns that gamification, when misused or overused, can have adverse effects. Almeida et al. (2023) identified 87 studies reporting negative outcomes, including motivational decline and cheating. Tomé Klock et al. (2023) raise ethical concerns around voluntariness and cognitive manipulation. Mogavi et al. (2022)  describe a case in which learners became more focused on maintaining game mechanics than on making substantive progress, an example of how rewards can steer attention away from actual learning. Even earlier  studies, such as Hanus & Fox (2015) and Iten & Petko (2016),  showed gamified learning environments could reduce motivation and  performance when rewards were poorly aligned with cognitive goals. These  findings challenge the assumption that interactivity is inherently  beneficial and call into question whether our tools are fostering  reflection or simply simulating it.

I began to reframe how I use engagement tools. Less as a measure of participation; more as a prompt for explanation or discussion. The goal was not activity. It was attention [K3; A4].

This shift pushed me to reflect on my own education. I realised that many of my most formative experiences weren’t gamified, but role-based. We were treated as engineers. Assignments required us to act as professionals: Analysing data, writing reports, making technical recommendations under realistic constraints. It was a combination of an assessment, and from our side a performance, it gave us frame within we coudl apply ourselves.

I first brought that model into my own teaching while leading a Professional Skills and Ethics course at Queen’s University. Grounded in <a href="https://www.ontario.ca/laws/statute/90p28" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">Professional Engineers Act (R.R.O. 1990)</a>, the course invited students to analyse real misconduct cases, evaluate risks, and write formal communications as if they were practising engineers. Since then, I’ve used similar framing in technical courses. Students draw on real site data from the BGS Geology Viewer, the BGS Wellbore Repository, the NASA GRACE project API, and GIS overlays in Google Earth. These aren’t just datasets, they also serve as props and scenery: Narrative elements. Students work as if embedded in real projects, with real decisions to make and real consequences to weigh.

Some classroom tools capture attention, but in my course design, I intend to also build it. Gamification, if shallow, tends to fade. But immersion, the kind you find in world-rich games like <a href="https://elderscrolls.bethesda.net/en" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">The Elder Scrolls</a> or the tabletop logic of <a href="https://www.dndbeyond.com/?srsltid=AfmBOoriSzUChY6CVNgr4DMxFZu82m1I6YaH04Br2TzQKMHAmeXAuD1x" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"> Dungeons & Dragons </a> relies on structure, depth, and buy-in. That’s the model I follow now, as the dungeeon master.

***Core Area 2b Case ii References***

* Almeida, C., Kalinowski, M., Uchoa, A. and Feijó, B. (2023) ‘Negative effects of gamification in education software: Systematic mapping and practitioner perceptions’, arXiv preprint, arXiv:2306.09488. Available at: https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.09488 
* Domínguez, A., Saenz-de-Navarrete, J., de-Marcos, L., Fernández-Sanz, L., Pagés, C. and Martínez-Herráiz, J.J. (2013) ‘Gamifying learning experiences: Practical implications and outcomes’, Computers & Education, 63, pp. 380–392. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2012.12.020 
* Hanus, M.D. and Fox, J. (2015) ‘Assessing the effects of gamification in the classroom: A longitudinal study on intrinsic motivation, social comparison, satisfaction, effort, and academic performance’, Computers & Education, 80, pp. 152–161. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2014.08.019 
* Iten, N. and Petko, D. (2016) ‘Learning with serious games: Is fun playing the game a predictor of learning success?’, British Journal of Educational Technology, 47(1), pp. 151–163. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.12226 
* Mogavi, R.H., Guo, B., Zhang, Y., Haq, E.-U., Hui, P. and Ma, X. (2022) ‘When gamification spoils your learning: A qualitative case study of gamification misuse in a language-learning app’, arXiv preprint, arXiv:2211.07487. Available at: https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.07487 
* Tomé Klock, A.C., Santana, B.S. and Hamari, J. (2023) ‘Ethical challenges in gamified education research and development: An umbrella review and potential directions’, arXiv preprint, arXiv:2303.00332. Available at: https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.00332



<h2 id="Core_Area_2c"></h2>

 
***Core Area 2b Case iii: Digital Textbooks and Multilingual Access: Affordability, Inclusivity, and Cognitive Load***

Differences in technical lexicons, academic assumptions, and prior preparation can limit access even in institutions that pride themselves on inclusion. At the University of Greenwich, I teach a civil and environmental engineering cohort that is overwhelmingly international, multilingual, and often composed of first-generation university students. While conversational fluency in English is common, technical fluency is not. Terms like <em>hydraulic head</em>, <em>shear stress</em>, or <em>Darcy flux</em> are dense even for native speakers. For non-native speakers, they often sit atop an invisible stack of linguistic and conceptual barriers.

To address this, I integrate open-access digital textbooks from the <a href="https://gw-project.org" target="_blank" style="text-decoration: underline; color: #004080;">Groundwater Project</a> into my courses. These are seminal texts authored by international experts and made available in multiple languages, including French, Spanish, Farsi, Portuguese, and Urdu. This allows students to cross-reference difficult concepts in the language they understand best, reducing cognitive load and enabling deeper conceptual understanding.

The texts are freely accessible to read online and downloadable in PDF format, removing the financial burden of purchasing traditional textbooks. I provide links directly through the module’s Moodle site and include specific reading assignments and diagrams in both English and translated formats where available. Lecture materials are adapted to reflect global case studies, using consistent technical terminology aligned with these multilingual resources.

I also design assessments with flexible topic options and multiple technical entry points to support students from varied academic backgrounds. Where appropriate, I schedule teaching around midday prayer and include structured breaks, fostering a learning environment that is inclusive, respectful, and attentive to student wellbeing.

***Core Area 2b Evidence***

<a href="https://fc79.gw-project.org/english/" target="_blank" style="text-decoration: underline; color: #004080;">-Representative Multilingual Edition Seminal Textbook (Freeze and Cherry 1979)</a>

2-MODULE HANDBOOK IDENTIFYING MULTILINGUAL TEXTS

***Core Area 2b Reflections***

What I’ve come to understand is that inclusion is not about adding more content or offering simplified alternatives but about removing the silent obstacles that prevent understanding. For many of my students, the barrier isn’t motivation or intelligence. It’s vocabulary. A student who can hold a conversation in English may still struggle with terms like “Darcy flux” or “steady-state boundary conditions.” When the language of teaching becomes opaque, so does the discipline.

Integrating multilingual, open-access texts was not part of a formal strategy. It began as a response to students using Google Translate during lectures, often misinterpreting technical terms. The Groundwater Project’s high-quality translations offered a more accurate and structured alternative. What I did not anticipate was the confidence it helped to unlock. Students who had hesitated began asking questions. Misconceptions surfaced earlier, which meant they could be addressed earlier. That shift was pedagogical, not just linguistic.

This experience has reshaped how I understand cognitive load. Sweller’s framework (Sweller, 1988; Paas & Sweller, 2012) makes clear that extraneous demands, such as linguistic decoding, reduce the cognitive bandwidth available for conceptual reasoning. Providing materials in a student’s first language does not dilute content; it preserves cognitive capacity for understanding it. Inclusive design is not remediation. It is rigour, structured accessibly.

I now routinely adapt my teaching with this in mind, from pacing and whiteboard sequencing to how I design assessments. Where possible, I align my practice with Universal Design for Learning (CAST, 2018), offering multiple modes of engagement and recognising that students bring different cognitive rhythms, cultural frames, and levels of prior exposure.

Respecting prayer schedules, providing structured breaks, and scaffolding key concepts in multilingual form are not indulgences. They are part of a professional, human-centred approach to education in a diverse and global classroom (Ryan & Viete, 2009).

This reflection is not about textbooks. It is about what they revealed: that access is not a baseline, but a continuous act of design. And that effective teaching requires more than clarity. It requires empathy, precision, and the willingness to re-engineer the conditions under which learning takes place.


***Core Area 2b References***

* CAST (2018). Universal Design for Learning Guidelines version 2.2. Wakefield, MA: CAST. https://udlguidelines.cast.org 
* Paas, F. and Sweller, J., 2012. An evolutionary upgrade of cognitive load theory: Using the human motor system and collaboration to support the learning of complex cognitive tasks. Educational Psychology Review, 24(1), pp.27-45.
* Ryan, J. and Viete, R., 2009. Respectful interactions: Learning with international students in the English-speaking academy. Teaching in Higher education, 14(3), pp.303-314.
* Sweller, J., 1988. Cognitive load during problem solving: Effects on learning. Cognitive science, 12(2), pp.257-285.


